What is project management?
As defined in PMIS, PMBOK, project management is application of knowledge, skills, tools and techniques to project activities to meet
project requirements. So every project will have an objective to accomplish. Similarly, the objective of project management is to make 
the final deliverables in a finite time and budget. This involves having clear understanding about the deliverables of the project, 
required resources for the project, resource in terms of human resources, technical resources, financial resources etc. Project manager
should have a full picture of those aspects, we can call it as constraints or aspects and manage those throughout the project life cycle 
for which a project manager should have a full view about a project and what is that this project has to accomplish. That objective 
should be clear. So as part of project management, the six constraints which project manager should look at are scope, time, quality, cost,
risk and resources. So each of these areas has very important role to play in project management. The clarity in scope, the clarity in 
terms of schedule within which the project has to be delivered, the cost, what it incurs to that particular project, once it is finalized,
one cannot vary, one cannot change without any proper approvals. Similar to that, we have quality management which has to ensure the 
scope, the specifications what are defined, project output will be accordingly achieved, risk, every project is taken up for a specific 
reason by organization. So organization should assess the risk associated with the project and similarly as project progresses various
different risks has to be identified like risk related to project management, risk related to technology area, risk related to resources,
risk related to financial things. So broadly risk management plays a very important role. So there will be something called contingency 
reserve kept for a identified risk above the cost what is estimated for various deliverables from the project. So every projects require 
resources, resources may be in terms of human resources, financial resources, technology resources, environmental resources.
So all these resources are used to produce the output of the project. So these resources has to be managed with the sufficient 
optimization and standardizations required. Now let us understand the definition of a project. So what is a project? PMI defines 
a project as a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service or result. The temporary nature of a project 
indicates that the project has a definite beginning and end. So when I say product, unique product, it means every output, 
it may be similar products you are producing with the same features and functionality, but the output of every project is unique
because it is unique in terms of all the six constraints what we just discussed now. So when I say product, it is very easy for 
us to visualize. It may be a desktop, it may be a laptop, it may be a car, it may be a machine, etc. But how do I visualize a service?
A project's output is a service. Now it is it's about building a capability, a project by through a project, a capability can be built
to ensure services can be provided. That's what the output of project is service. For example, if I think about a taxi services for 
providing a taxi services, I need a mobile app, I need taxi, I need a server, I need a data center. So all these are various different 
products and services. Here service example can be internet service. So combination of all the services and products builds the
capability for an organizations who can provide the taxi services. So building that capability, we say it is an output of a particular 
project, which is called service. Similarly, results can be improvement of something, improvement in customer satisfaction, increase in 
some specific objectives or specific results needs to be achieved in performance perspective. So output of every project will be unique 
product or a service or a result. This we need to clearly understand. So when we say there is a definite beginning and end, every 
project starts at a certain point in time and ends at a certain point in time. So it has a definite beginning and end.
That is the reason it is temporary in nature. It is not an ongoing business activity.


Project planning
Project life cycle has five different phases from initiation to closure. Today, we will be learning about this phase that comes 
immediately after initiation in which the project plan is documented and further requirements are defined. Project planning includes 
the following things. The first and foremost thing is describing the objectives or outputs we are expecting the project to yield. 
Second thing we have is the elaboration of the scope to make sure what the project is all about and what all can be expected from the
project. The third step we have is forming a schedule. This schedule is important to run or perform different tasks of a project, 
each task having its own start date and end date. This helps the project to finish in the scheduled time and limit. Lastly, we have
making and generating progress reports in which all that went during the tenure of the project is documented. This helps in evaluating
the project and helps in the forthcoming projects. Now let's have a look at the project planning fundamentals. The first fundamental 
that we have is the determination of scope, cost and resources. The determination helps us in having a rough estimate about the time 
that is required to finish the project. It helps us in determining the number of people required and what should be their skill set. 
We can divide the project into smaller manageable sections and this is made possible with the help of work breakdown structure.
The second fundamental refers to identifying the problem. There are several techniques by which we can collect information and 
discover issues. There may be several problems in a project and in that case, several risks or issues are prioritized and the risk
that requires immediate attention is dealt with first. Then comes identification of stakeholders. When we can identify the 
stakeholders, we can know who all will be affected and in what way. It helps us having a better understanding of the project. 
Stakeholders may be anybody. They may be the part of the project team or project managers or customers. They help during the project 
and contribute to its success. Then the last fundamental we will discuss is defining project objectives. A project plan is made 
keeping in mind the requirements of the project team and expectations of the stakeholders. If the project team can meet the 
expectations of the stakeholders, then only we can say that the project is successful. Now when we know about project planning and
its fundamentals, it's time to see why project planning is so important. Project planning reduces the cost and time of the project
as every step is monitored and optimized in the best possible manner. Project planning increases employee satisfaction as every
employee who is a part is engaged in the team for improved project performance. Project planning helps in the implementation of
quality assurance as the output of every step is duly tested. Lastly, project planning helps in reducing project risk as planning
helps to analyze, prioritize and deal with that risk. Moving on, let's have a look at the tools for project planning. 
The first tool that we have is a Gantt chart. Today, Gantt charts are one of the most popular project management tools.
They help in tracking the status of the work at a particular time and their independencies on each other. Gantt charts help 
in showing different phases and steps involved in a project. The second tool we will talk about is critical path method or CPM.
Critical path method helps in scheduling the project activities so that the project runs properly. The critical path method focuses 
on the longest stretch of dependent tasks and determines the time needed to complete them. The next tool is project evaluation and 
review technique or PERT chart. PERT provides a graphical representation of the project's timeline, explaining the independencies 
of different tasks. This tool not only helps in making a schedule, but also helps in coordinating with all the team members. 
The fourth tool we will check is work breakdown structure. Work breakdown structure is a very common tool that makes it possible for
the team to break its work into manageable sections. Work breakdown structure is a step-to-step process that helps in completing the
project efficiently. The last tool we will see is project documentation. Project documentation is an integral part of the project
lifecycle. Project documentation helps in understanding the mistakes done during the project and more importantly provides guidelines
for the upcoming project. Now, when we know about different tools for project planning, it becomes essential that we know the necessary 
steps of project planning. There are seven steps in project planning. Let's have a look at each of them in detail. The first step is
identification of stakeholders. As we have discussed, stakeholders could be anybody. They could be a part of the team or a project 
manager or a customer. When we identify stakeholders, we can find out the expectations and requirements that are to be looked upon 
in this project. This gives us a clearer picture of the project and helps in establishing the project scope. So the next step we
have is defining the project scope. This helps in determining a list of specific project goals and deliverables that are to be
achieved during the course of the project. After we have defined the project scope, it is time to set project objectives and 
prioritize them. The initial ideas that were there before are now elaborated and final steps to complete the project are defined.
In the next step, the deliverables are determined. After all, project deliverables are the only reason why the project is being 
created. This step involves finding out what these deliverables will be and the deadlines of their delivery. Then the step that 
comes into picture is creating a project schedule. The project schedule refers to the guidelines when a particular task is to be
started and when it is supposed to end. This helps in monitoring the growth of the project and later helps in generating progress 
reports. The next step is the step of risk analysis. This step plays an extremely important role in the success of the overall project. 
It helps in identifying the risk, prioritizing them, and taking steps to limit them. The last step in project planning is to generate 
progress reports. In this step, we update the stakeholders about the project growth and it is done so that all the concerned team 
members can have a look at the progress of the project. After all this information, Max thanks Jack for the explanation and looks 
forward to plan projects within the budget and of better quality. Now let us learn about project management in Excel. 
Microsoft Excel is one of the most common applications these days. It is used in both offices and at homes. 
Microsoft Excel is an easy project management tool that allows the team members to easily see the tasks in a project, develop a plan,
and track its progress. Before we learn more about project management in Excel, let's first have a look why do we use Excel. 
Microsoft Excel is an easy tool to plan a project, so it can be used by people who are digners in terms of project management. 
In Excel, one can find several analytical tools like Concatenate, Len, and Counter, so this makes data analysis easy and effective.
As the entry of data is easy, same is tracking and controlling of project status. Then there are several project management 
templates in Excel that help us to have an effective distribution of project data. 
